:orphan:

Dynamic networks
================

Goals
-----


.. todo::

   <!--
   INET has support for simulating dynamic networks, i.e. networks in which nodes can be created
   and deleted during the course of the simulation, instead of a static network where the same nodes
   are present in the entire course of the simulation.
   -->

INET has support for simulating dynamic networks, i.e. networks in which
nodes can be created and deleted during the course of the simulation.
This is in contrast to static networks where the same nodes are present
in the entire course of the simulation.

This showcase demonstrates dynamic networks, and contains an example
simulation in which wireless nodes are created, exist for some time, and
then they are deleted. While in existence, they move around and send
ping request messages.

INET version: ``4.0``

Source files location: `inet/showcases/general/dynamic <https://github.com/inet-framework/inet-showcases/tree/master/general/dynamic>`__

The model
---------

The ``ScenarioManager`` module can be used to create and destroy nodes
during simulations (it can also change many aspects of the configuration
while the simulation is running, but those features are out of scope for
this showcase.) The scenario manager module takes an XML script input.
The XML script describes the actions to be taken during the course of
the simulation, i.e. which parameter should be changed and when, what
nodes should be created or deleted and when, etc.

.. todo::

   <!-- - creating and destroying nodes
   - the config
   - the results -->

   <!--
   TODO:

   The ScenarioManager takes an XML config file. This has a <scenario> tag
   and the creation and destruction of nodes can be done with the create and delete tag

   The `ScenarioManager` executes an XML script. The script shedules events to take place at
   certain times during the simulation. It can change module parameters, add or remove connections,
   change parameters of connections, and create or delete network nodes.

   The script contains a `<scenario>` element. Under this element, there can be multiple elements...

   So there can be multiple element. Each executes a command, and have a t parameter which specifies
   the time it should be executed. There is the <at> element which just has the time, and there can be
   any number of elements under it, which will be executed at the specified time.

   The available commands include <set-param>, <connect>, etc.
   Nodes are created with the <create-module> element, and deleted with the <delete-module> element

   The elements can have various attributes. The create-module has type, parent, submodule.
   What are these.

   The delete element just needs a module name, and it will delete that module.

   Example:

   script here

   - then about the script used for this configuration
   - it creates nodes periodically and destroys them after some time

   -->

The ``ScenarioManager`` module
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``ScenarioManager`` module executes an XML script. The XML script
can be specified inline with the ``xml()`` function, or as an external
XML file with the ``xmldoc()`` function. The script specifies commands
to be executed at certain times during the simulation. The commands can
change module parameters, add or remove connections, set connection
parameters, create or destroy modules, etc. The XML script contains a
``<scenario>`` element. Under this element, there can be multiple
elements, which specify the commands. These have attributes. Each
command has to specify a time value, at which the command should be
executed. Some elements have a ``t`` attribute to specify the time. The
time can be also specified with the ``<at>`` element. Under the ``<at>``
element, there can be multiple other elements which will be executed at
the time specified by the ``<at>`` element. (For a more comprehensive
description of the ``ScenarioManager`` and the available commands, refer
to the `ScenarioManager NED
documentation <https://omnetpp.org/doc/inet/api-current/neddoc/index.html?p=inet.common.scenario.ScenarioManager.html>`__
in the INET Reference.)

Modules can be created with the ``<create-module>`` element. This has
three attributes:

-  ``type``: specifies the NED type of the module to be created, in the
   WHAT notation?
-  ``submodule``: specifies the name of the module (this name can be
   used to delete the module)
-  ``parent``: specifies the parent of the module (submodules of
   existing modules can be created as well)

The created modules will have a random position inside the parent module
(or on the playground if the parent module is ``"."``).

.. todo::

   <!-- TODO: the mobility constraints need to be set, otherwise error
   why is it need to be set? what happens if a standardHost is created which doesn't have a
   mobility module by default?
   i guess its an error, because if a host has a mobility module but the contraints are not set
   its an error, and if it doesnt have a mobility module,
   the contraints cannot be set. -->

The created modules need to have a mobility module (``WirelessHost`` and
derivatives have one by default, but other modules might not, e.g.
``StandardHost``. A mobility module type needs to be specified for these
hosts.) Also, mobility constraints need to be set to limit the random
position of the created nodes (otherwise an error occurs.)

Modules can be deleted with the ``<delete-module>`` element. It has just
one attribute, ``module``, which is the name of the module to be
deleted.

Here is an example script:

.. literalinclude:: ../example.xml

This XML script will create a ``WirelessHost`` named ``someHost`` in the
network at 10 seconds simulation-time, and delete it at 20 seconds
simulation-time.

.. todo::

   <!-- Note that these elements don't have `t` attributes, thus they have to be placed under an
   `<at>` element. -->

Note that neither the ``<create-module>`` nor the ``<delete-module>``
element has a ``t`` attribute, thus they have to be placed under an
``<at>`` element.

The parameters of the dynamically created modules can be set from the
ini file, just as with other modules. The configuration of the
dynamically created modules will take effect when they are spawn.

.. todo::

   <!-- TODO: Ipv4NetworkConfigurator cant be used -->

Note that ``Ipv4NetworkConfigurator`` is not compatible with dynamically
created nodes. More on this in the configuration section.

The configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In the example simulation, there will be a static wireless node acting
as a destination for ping requests. Other wireless nodes will be created
periodically, will send ping requests to the destination node, and will
be deleted after some time. The example simulation for this showcase
uses the following network:

.. figure:: network2.png
   :width: 100% 

The network contains an ``IntegratedCanvasVisualizer``, an
``Ieee80211ScalarRadioMedium``, and a ``ScenarioManager`` module. It
also contains a host named ``destinationNode``, whose type is
``DynamicHost``.

The ``DynamicHost`` type is defined in the NED file,
:download:`DynamicShowcase.ned <../DynamicShowcase.ned>`. It is
basically an ``AdhocHost``, but it is configured to use a per-host
``HostAutoConfigurator`` module instead of the global
``IPv4NetworkConfigurator``. The reason for this is that
``Ipv4NetworkConfigurator`` doesn't support IP address assignment in
dynamic scenarios. Here is the NED definition of ``DynamicHost``:

.. literalinclude:: ../DynamicShowcase.ned
   :start-at: DynamicHost
   :end-before: DynamicShowcase

The ``contraintArea`` parameters in all hosts' mobility modules are set
to confine the position of the newly created nodes to the playground:

.. literalinclude:: ../omnetpp.ini
   :start-at: MinX
   :end-at: MaxZ

.. <!-- The nodes are created at a random position, constrained by the mobility settings -->

The ``HostAutoConfigurator``'s ``interfaces`` parameter needs to be set
to the hosts' wlan interface:

.. literalinclude:: ../omnetpp.ini
   :start-at: autoConfigurator.interfaces
   :end-at: autoConfigurator.interfaces

.. <!-- The created node's mobility settings -->
   <!-- The nodes are configured to move around randomly...actually, linearmobility,
   random angle, same speed -->

The destination host is configured to be stationary, and the source
hosts are configured to have ``LinearMobility``, and move around in
random directions:

.. literalinclude:: ../omnetpp.ini
   :start-at: "StationaryMobility"
   :end-at: initFromDisplayString

The XML scenario used for this simulation is defined in
:download:`scenario.xml <../scenario.xml>`. The scenario creates 10
``DynamicHost``\ s named ``sourceNodeX`` (where is X is the index)
periodically, with a period of 2.71 seconds. Each host is deleted 4
seconds after creation.

Results
-------

What happens when the simulation is run is shown in the following video:



.. video:: General1.mp4
   :width: 698

The hosts are being created, move in random directions, ping
``destinationNode``, and eventually get deleted.
