:orphan:

IEEE 802.11 Infrastructure and Adhoc Mode
=========================================

Goals
-----

802.11 devices can operate in two basic modes. In infrastructure mode,
nodes connect to wireless networks created by access points, which
provide services, such as internet access. In adhoc mode, nodes create
an adhoc wireless network, without using additional network
infrastructure.

INET has support for simulating both operating modes. This showcase
demonstrates how to configure 802.11 networks in infrastructure and
adhoc mode, and how to check if they are configured correctly. The
showcase contains two example simulations defined in omnetpp.ini.

INET version: ``4.0``

Source files location: `inet/showcases/wireless/infrastructure <https://github.com/inet-framework/inet-showcases/tree/master/wireless/infrastructure>`__

The model
---------

.. todo::

   <!--
   - you need to use the correct management module
   - there is simple and normal management modules
   -->

   <!--
   The operating mode of a node is determined by the type of management module the node has.
   The management module type can be set from ini or ned, or by using a host type which has the proper
   management module type by default.
   -->

A node's operating mode (infrastructure or adhoc) is determined by the
type of its management module. The management module type can be set
from the ini or NED files, or by choosing one of INET's host types which
have the desired management module by default.

In INET, the management module is a submodule of ``Ieee80211Interface``.
It connects to the MAC module, and it is responsible for handling
management frames, such as beacon frames, probe request and response
frames, and association and authentication frames. The management module
is also responsible for scanning channels and switching between them.
Several types of management modules are available:

- ``Ieee80211MgmtSta``: management module for stations (nodes that join
   wireless networks) in infrastructure mode
- ``Ieee80211MgmtAp``: management module for access points in
   infrastructure mode
- ``Ieee80211MgmtAdhoc``: management module for nodes in adhoc mode

.. todo::

   <!--
   There is the simplified versions of all of these except the adhoc
   Which hosts have them
   The role of agent modules
   -->

   <!--
   TODO: the simplified versions dont implement beacons, probes, association, authentication
   they only send and receive data frames and treats all stations as if they were associated
   -->

There are also simplified versions of the infrastructure mode management
modules: ``Ieee80211MgmtStaSimplified`` and
``Ieee80211MgmtApSimplified``. They only send and receive data frames,
and they don't simulate the association and authentication process, but
assume that stations are always associated with the access point. They
also cannot simulate handovers.

The agent module (``Ieee80211AgentSta``) is the submodule of
``Ieee80211Interface`` in devices that act as stations (nodes with
``Ieee80211MgmtSta`` management module types.) It connects to the
management module, and it is responsible for initiating channel
scanning, associations and handovers. It controls these by sending
commands to the management module (which turn sends commands to the
MAC.) TODO: is this correct? It basically simulates user actions, such
as the user instructing the device to connect to a Wifi network. The
topology of connected modules in ``Ieee80211Interface`` is displayed on
the following image:

.. figure:: submodules.png
   :width: 100% 

.. todo::

   <!-- TODO: note that you can see if the correct management type is configured at the mib.
   -> not needed -->

Hosts can be configured to use infrastructure or adhoc mode by
specifying the corresponding management module type. By default,
``WirelessHost`` uses ``Ieee80211MgmtSta``, and ``AccessPoint`` uses
``Ieee80211MgmtAp``. Additionally, ``AdhocHost`` is suitable for
simulating adhoc wireless networks. It is derived from ``WirelessHost``
by changing management module to ``Ieee80211MgmtAdhoc`` (and also
turning on IPv4 forwarding.)

In infrastructure mode, the SSID of the network created by an access
point is a parameter of ``Ieee80211MgmtAp``, and it is "SSID" by
default. In stations, the agent module has an SSID parameter, which sets
which network should the node join. When the simulation is run, the
access points automatically create the wireless networks, and agent
modules in station nodes cause the nodes to automatically join the
appropriate network.

.. todo::

   <!-- TODO: about the adhoc management module...what it does and what it doesnt -->

The ``Ieee80211MgmtAdhoc`` module only sends data frames, and discards
all other frame types like control and management frames. Also, it
doesn't switch channels, just operates on the channel configured in the
radio.

The configuration
-----------------

The showcase contains two example simulations, with one of them
demonstrating infrastructure mode and the other adhoc mode (the
configurations in omnetpp.ini are named ``Infrastructure`` and
``Adhoc``.) Two nodes communicate wirelessly in both of them, the
difference being that in the first case they communicate through an
access point in infrastructure mode, and in the second, directly between
each other in adhoc mode. The two simulations use similar networks, the
only difference is that there is an access point in the network for the
infrastructure mode configuration. The networks look like the following:

.. figure:: network.png
   :width: 100% 

.. todo::

   write the mode on the playground in a figure ? -> obvious its
   infrastructure or not -> not needed

The networks contain two ``WirelessHosts`` named ``host1`` and
``host2``. They also contain an ``Ipv4NetworkConfigurator``, an
``Ieee80211ScalarRadioMedium`` and an ``IntegratedVisualizer`` module.
The network for the infrastructure mode configuration also contains an
``AccessPoint``.

.. todo::

   <!--
   TODO: the configuration

   <p>
   .. video:: Infrastructure1.mp4
   </p>

   <p>
   .. video:: Infrastructure2.mp4
   </p>

   second one seems better
   the third one too

   <pre>
   How does it work? In infrastructure mode, the agent module initiates connecting to the
   wireless network. In adhoc mode, they are assumed to be connected.
   </pre>

   <pre>
   some of these might belong to the next section (the configuration)
   </pre>
   -->

In both simulations, ``host1`` is configured to send UDP packets to
``host2``. ``WirelessHost`` has ``Ieee80211MgmtSta`` by default, thus no
configuration of the management module is needed in the infrastructure
mode simulation. In the adhoc mode simulation, the default management
module in hosts is replaced with ``Ieee80211MgmtAdhoc``. (The same
effect could have been achieved by using the ``AdhocHost`` host type
instead of ``WirelessHost``, as the former has the ad hoc management
module by default.) The configuration key for the management module type
in omnetpp.ini is the following:

``{.include} *.*.wlan[*].mgmtType = "Ieee80211MgmtAdhoc"``

Note that in the ``AdhocHost`` type, forwarding is enabled. However,
forwarding is not required in this simulation, because the hosts can
reach each other in one hop, and packet don't need to be forwarded
(forwarding is required for multihop networks.)

Results
-------

Infrastructure mode
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When the infrastructure mode simulation is run, the hosts get associated
with the access point, and ``host1`` starts sending UDP packets to
``host2``. The packets are relayed by the access point. The following
video depicts the UDP traffic:

.. video:: Infrastructure4.mp4
   :width: 698

   <!--internal video recording, animation speed none, zoom 1.3x-->

To verify that the correct management type is configured, go into a
host's wlan module. The ``mib`` module (management information base)
displays information about the node's status in the network, e.g. MAC
address, association state, weather or not it's using QoS, etc. It also
displays information about the mode, i.e. infrastructure or adhoc,
station or access point. The wlan module of ``host1`` and
``accessPoint`` is displayed on the following image:

.. figure:: mib_infrastructure.png
   :width: 100% 

.. todo::

   <!--
   TODO: this might not be needed because it should be mentioned earlier
   or the earlier image should be cropped to show only the topology
   there should be a screenshot showing the mib in both cases
   and even for the AP and after association for host1
   -->

Adhoc mode
~~~~~~~~~~

When the adhoc mode simulation is run, the hosts can communicate
directly with each other. There is no association and authentication,
``host1`` starts to send UDP data at the start of the simulation.
``host1`` is sending UDP packets to ``host2`` in the following video:

.. video:: Adhoc3.mp4
   :width: 698

   <!--internal video recording, animation speed none, zoom 1.3x-->

The wlan module of ``host1`` is displayed on the following image,
showing the mib and the host's network status:

.. figure:: adhocmib.png
   :width: 100% 

