Visualizing Network Path Activity
=================================

Goals
-----

With INET simulations, it is often useful to be able to visualize
network traffic. INET offers several visualizers for this task,
operating at various levels of the network stack. In this showcase, we
examine ``NetworkRouteVisualizer`` that can provide graphical feedback
about network layer level traffic.

The showcase consists of four simulation models, each demonstrating
different features of the network path activity visualizer.

INET version: ``3.6``

Source files location: `inet/showcases/visualizer/networkpathactivity <https://github.com/inet-framework/inet-showcases/tree/master/visualizer/networkpathactivity>`__

About the Visualizer
--------------------

In INET, network path activity can be visualized by including a
``NetworkRouteVisualizer`` module in the simulation. Adding an
``IntegratedVisualizer`` module is also an option, because it also
contains a ``NetworkRouteVisualizer`` module. Network path activity
visualization is disabled by default, it can be enabled by setting the
visualizer's ``displayRoutes`` parameter to true.

``NetworkRouteVisualizer`` currently observes packets that pass through
the network layer (i.e. carry data from/to higher layers), but not those
that are internal to the operation of the network layer protocol. That
is, packets such as ARP, although potentially useful, will not trigger
the visualization. Visualizing such packets may be implemented in future
INET revisions.

The activity between two nodes is represented visually by a polyline
arrow which points from the source node to the destination node.
``NetworkRouteVisualizer`` follows packet throughout its path so the
polyline goes through all nodes that are part of the packet's path. The
arrow appears after the first packet has been received, then gradually
fades out unless it is reinforced by further packets. Color, fading time
and other graphical properties can be changed with parameters of the
visualizer.

By default, all packets and nodes are considered for the visualization.
This selection can be narrowed with the visualizer's ``packetFilter``
and ``nodeFilter`` parameters.

Enabling Visualization of Network Path Activity
-----------------------------------------------

The following example shows how to enable the network path activity
visualization with its default settings. For the first example, we
configured a wired network. The simulation can be run by choosing the
``EnablingVisualization`` configuration from the ini file.

The network contains two ``StandardHosts``, a ``source`` host and a
``destination`` host. In this configuration, the ``source`` host will be
pinging the ``destination`` host.

.. figure:: NetworkPathSimple.png
   :width: 80%
   :align: center

The ``pathVisualizer's`` type is ``NetworkRouteVisualizer``. We enable
network path activity visualization by setting the ``displayRoutes``
parameter to true.

.. code-block:: none

   *.pathVisualizer.*.displayRoutes = true

The following video shows what happens when we start the simulation.

.. video:: EnablingVisualization_v0614.m4v
   :width: 560
   :align: center

At the beginning of the video, a red strip appears and moves from
``source`` to ``destination``. This strip is the standard OMNeT++
animation for packet transmissions, and has nothing to do with
``NetworkRouteVisualizer``. When the packet is received in whole by
``destination`` (the red strip disappears), an arrow is added by
``NetworkRouteVisualizer`` between the two hosts, indicating network
path activity. The packet's name is also displayed on the arrow. The
arrow fades out quickly, because the ``fadeOutTime`` parameter of the
visualizer is set to a small value.

Note, however, that ARP traffic does not activate the visualization,
because ARP packets do not pass through the network layer.

Filtering Network Path Activity
-------------------------------

In complex networks where many nodes are placed and several protocols
are used, it is often useful to be able to filter network traffic to
visualize only the part of the network traffic we are interested in.

The following example shows how to set packet filtering. This simulation
can be run by choosing the ``StaticNetworkPaths`` configuration from the
ini file.

We use the following network for this showcase:

.. figure:: NetworkPathComplex_v0703.png
   :width: 100%

The network consists of five ``routers`` (``router0..router4``), four
``etherSwitches`` (``etherSwitch0..etherSwitch3``) and eight
``StandardHosts``. There are two source hosts, ``source1`` and
``source2``, which will be pinging the two destination hosts,
``destination1`` and ``destination2``. The ``videoServer`` node streams
a video to the ``videoClient`` node. The remaining two endpoints
(``host1`` and ``host2``) are inactive in this simulation.

For this network, the visualizer's type is ``IntegratedVisualizer``.
Network path visualization is filtered to display only ping traffic. The
video stream packets are not visualized by network path activity
visualizer. The ``fadeOutMode`` and ``fadeOutTime`` parameters have been
adjusted so that the network path activity arrow does not fade out
completely before the next ping packet arrives.

.. code-block:: none

   *.visualizer.*.networkRouteVisualizer.displayRoutes = true
   *.visualizer.*.networkRouteVisualizer.packetFilter = "ping*"
   *.visualizer.*.networkRouteVisualizer.fadeOutMode = "simulationTime"
   *.visualizer.*.networkRouteVisualizer.fadeOutTime = 1.4s

The following video shows what happens when the simulation is run.

.. video:: StaticNetworkPaths_v0703.m4v
   :width: 698

Each arrow has a different color indicating different paths. You can see
that although there is both video stream and ping traffic in the
network, ``NetworkRouteVisualizer`` displays only the latter, due to the
presence of the ``packetFilter`` parameter.

Visualizing Network Path Activity in a Mobile Ad-Hoc Network
------------------------------------------------------------

The following example shows how visualization can help you to follow
dynamically changing network path activity in a wireless environment.
The simulation can be run by choosing the ``Mobile`` configuration from
the ini file.

Nodes are of the type ``AodvRouter``, and are placed randomly on the
playground. One of the nodes is the ``source`` node which will be
pinging the ``destination`` node. The communication ranges of the nodes
have been chosen so that the network is connected but nodes can
typically only communicate by using multi-hop paths. The nodes will also
randomly roam within predefined borders.

.. figure:: NetworkPathMobileShowcase_v0606.png
   :width: 100%

The routing protocol is AODV, a reactive (on-demand) MANET routing
protocol. AODV operates with RREQ and RRES messages, but these messages
do not appear in the visualization because they do not pass through the
network layer. (You can watch a video about the AODV route searching
process in the ``Data Link Activity`` showcase, in the
``Visualizing Data Link Activity in a Mobile Ad-Hoc Network``
configuration.)

We use the following configuration for the visualization.

.. code-block:: none

   *.visualizer.*.networkRouteVisualizer.displayRoutes = true
   *.visualizer.*.networkRouteVisualizer.packetFilter = "ping*"
   *.visualizer.*.networkRouteVisualizer.fadeOutMode = "simulationTime"
   *.visualizer.*.networkRouteVisualizer.fadeOutTime = 5s

The following video shows what happens when the simulation is run.

.. video:: Mobile_v0614.m4v
   :width: 698

Blue circles are displays the communication range of ``source`` and
``destination``.

The video shows the network path ping packets are taking between
``source`` and ``destination``. Ping packets are forwarded to the next
hop until they reach ``destination``. The network path activity is
visualized after the ping packet has arrived to ``destination`` so we
get information about the path changes immediately.

When the existing route breaks due to two nodes drifting away (going out
of the communication range of each other), this manifests as link-level
failure. This condition is detected by AODV and it starts searching for
a new route. When the new route is found, the ping traffic resumes.

You can observe in the video that the route the ping packets take is not
always optimal (in terms of hop count). The reason is that nodes use an
existing route as long as possible, even when a shorter route becomes
available as a result of node movement. AODV is only activated when the
existing route breaks.

Displaying Network Path Activity in a Complex Network
-----------------------------------------------------

This configuration demonstrates how the visualizer reacts to the routing
changes in a complex network. A simulation is created for this example.
The simulation can be run by choosing the ``ChangingPaths``
configuration from the ini file.

The network contains four routers (``router0..router3``) which are
connected so as to create redundant network paths. The network also
contains six hosts. There are a wired and a wireless source-destination
pair. The remaining two hosts are inactive in this simulation. The wired
hosts are connected to the routers via switches (``etherSwitch0`` and
``etherSwitch1``), the wireless hosts are connected to the routers via
access points (``accessPoint0`` and ``accessPoint1``).

The following image displays the network for this example.

.. figure:: NetworkPathChanging.png
   :width: 100%

IP addresses are assigned manually, using the configuration file
``configuration.xml``. A lifecycle control script (``changeRoute.xml``)
has also been created for this configuration to turn the routers off and
on at certain times. The network uses the RIP routing protocol to ensure
that routing tables will be dynamically updated as a reaction to network
topology changes. During the simulation, ``wiredSource`` will be pinging
``wiredDestination`` and ``wirelessSource`` will be pinging
``wirelessDestination``.

In this showcase, we set the ``packetFilter`` parameter to display only
ICMP echo traffic. We use the following configuration for the
visualization.

.. code-block:: none

   *.visualizer.*.networkRouteVisualizer.displayRoutes = true *.visualizer.*.networkRouteVisualizer.packetFilter = "ping* and not *reply" *.visualizer.*.networkRouteVisualizer.fadeOutMode = "simulationTime" *.visualizer.*.networkRouteVisualizer.fadeOutTime = 1.4s

In the following video we can examine that how network path activity
visualization follows the routing changes in a complex network.

.. video:: ChangingPaths_v0614.m4v
   :width: 698

At the beginning of the video, ping traffic is routed through
``router1``. After five seconds, small cogwheels appear above
``router1``, then cogwheels change to a red cross, indicating that
``router1`` has gone offline. Routers immediately update their routing
tables by using the RIP routing protocol. In the next few seconds, the
traffic between the sources and the destinations travels via
``router3``.

After a while, ``router1`` turns on again (the red cross disappears),
but this does not affect the ping traffic which still goes via
``router3``. In the 15th second, we can see that ``router3`` goes
offline. Routing tables are updated by using RIP, and as a result of
this, ping traffic flows through ``router1`` again. At the end of the
video, ``router3`` turns on, but it does not have an effect on the
network traffic.

More Information
----------------

This example only demonstrated the key features of network path
visualization. For more information, refer to the
``NetworkRouteVisualizer`` NED documentation.

Discussion
----------

Use this page in the GitHub issue tracker for commenting on this
showcase.
